Tell me something about your family situation,
where you lived in 1975. I live in Vietnam, in
Saigon, the main city. And practically the whole
family is in the military, my dad and my uncles and
all that. And my mom, she was a banker in Vietnam.
And we were still going to school, to elementary
school in 75.
So you were there in Saigon during the fall?
Uh-huh. We were still in there. In fact, the whole
family, nobody was out of town or anything.
Everybody was at home by that time. Can you tell me
about the final few days there in Saigon? Well, it
was pretty crazy. Everybody's going berserk
because they know it's going to, you know, this
country's going to fall and fail, you know. And
basically everybody's running around trying to
look for a place so that they could escape, and the
main one was just at the U.S. Embassy. That's where
the main place, because at the last minute, there
were at least a couple of helicopters flying back
and forth trying to take out the Americans that are
still there. And all these people trying to get in
and trying to jump in, trying to escape with them.
And that's one way. And the other way is everybody
went out to the port to go on the ship that was either
an oil tanker or a or an American Navy ship that were
there for a long time. And they would go and they
would be gone, taken away to wherever the boat was.
And so everybody was just crowded up there trying
to get in. It was real hectic. A lot of vandalized
people shopped in stores, getting all the windows
broken, all the stuff stolen. But they didn't care
because You know, they'd rather have freedom more
than living with the communists and all that. And
they were worried about their family. And the
young people, they really wanted to go. And some,
you know, they stayed back. Some, they decided
that if there was no way, they'd probably stay back
and try to live through it. Did you see any troops?
When I was out in the street, there wasn't any troop
maneuvering at all, but a couple nights before the
final took over, we were in a church, and I could see
that there were military tanks and all that moving
down the street, and I didn't know which side it was
on, but I'm pretty sure that... I'm pretty sure
that it was the South moving backward, trying to
pull back. And also, behind the tank, there were a
whole bunch of soldiers just running back. In
fact, everybody from the South Vietnamese army
was just pulling back and taking off their clothes
so that they could hide their identity. so that
just in case if the colonists come in, they won't
know that he was in the army, you know, in the forces
and all that. And after that was gone, you know, you
would see a whole bunch of bum people where they
would go and pick up the stuff that the soldier had
dropped, you know, like guns and clothes or
maybe... If the soldiers, they didn't care what
they drop off. They drop off their ID and wallets
and all that. So they had some money. So those bum
people or poor people, they would go and try to look
for money or cigarettes, you know, a few
cigarettes to smoke and all that. And some food
like, you know, candies or something like that.
Try to pick up whatever's left. What did your
family do? Did you all try to leave through the
embassy? My mom and my dad took three of us to the
embassy on our car. And when we got there, it was so
crowded that we couldn't barely move the car. So my
dad knew that we had no chance of getting in. So
because there were people all over the place. They
were climbing on fences and all that. And so we
decided to go back home. And basically, our whole
family just stayed at home because my
grandmother, at that time, she wanted everybody
to be together, especially in our house, so that
she know where everybody is and she know that
nobody's going to be missing and all that. Because
during the hectic, you want to keep your family
together so that you won't have any trouble
finding them. And when we went home after we went to
the embassy, My grandma told us that why don't we go
to the church and stay there a couple nights just in
case if the communists come in early and they would
take my dad away so fast. So in other words, we went
to the churches. you know, just to hide out for a
couple of days. And we went there. But otherwise,
we didn't think of going to the port or anything
like that. We thought that the embassy was our last
choice. And it wasn't open, so we thought
everybody just stayed home. And in fact, One
night, the night that we were supposed to go to the
church, we had dinner, and it was just a normal,
regular old family dinner. Of course, a lot of
people in my family, they were planning. They were
thinking real hard trying to find a way to escape.
Somehow, it was real quiet and all that. They
couldn't think of the port. And afterward, when we
got over here, my mom was real mad. Because if we
would have thought of going to the port, then the
whole family could have gone together instead of
going one by one over.
Basically, the port was the main thing. A lot of
Vietnamese people that wanted to get out got out by
the port at the last
minute before the communists came in. In fact,
when the communists came in, there was this one
ship that had loaded a whole bunch of people. They
took off shore just in time before the communists
came in. And those people got out. And the people
that were still left on the shore, they were so
unhappy. So they didn't know what to do. So they
would just go home. And they said, well, that's it.
That's the last chance we could leave. So what did
your family do immediately after the fall, when
the communists were in? After the fall, we We went
on our daily lives, but of course, during that
time, I think around at least two or three, two
weeks, there wasn't any work. You know, my mom
didn't go to work. My dad didn't go to work. Nobody
went to work. In fact, everybody stayed at home.
And we practically just stayed inside the house so
that, you know, so that just to keep out of trouble.
And in fact, I'm pretty sure that all the other
families are too, you know. So the street was just
deserted and all that. But basically, we just went
on doing our daily life stuff and all that except
for going to work. And, you know, We all knew, my mom
and my grandmother, you know, they all knew that
one day my dad's going to get taken. So, in fact, in
other words, you know, we just stayed at the house
just waiting for them to, for the communist to
knock on the door, you know. That's all. And, you
know, we minded our own business. There wasn't, we
didn't visit any friends. We didn't have any
visitor or anything like that at all. It was just
like a family only in one house and all that. So what
finally happened with your father? Well, after
that two weeks, business started going. You know,
people starting to open their shops and going to
work and all that.
The communist, they started to come to our house a
couple of times, you know, stay around two or three
hours just going in, acting real friendly, you
know, talking to my dad and all that. And there were
like around five of them. They came in wearing
their uniform, and they drove up by, you
know, they used a jeep to drive to our house, and
they went in, and when they came in, My dad and my mom
stayed out and talked to them, but my mom told us to
go inside to the bedroom and stay in there. But I was
so curious, and my sister was so curious, too, so we
would... sneak out, you know, just take a little
peek and hear what they're saying and all that. And
basically it was a real friendly conversation
asking, you know, how it is and all that. And then
after that, and then after that, uh, they, They
come back a couple of days, going back, talking to
my dad and all that. And then at the last meeting
that they had, the same five guys that came a whole
bunch of time, they came and they just took him
away. And my mom, she knew that the first meeting
that they had, she knew that a couple more times and
he's going to be taken away. So she packed his
clothes and gave him some packed medicine for him.
In fact, he had luggages already packed for him to
be ready if they should take him away. There
wouldn't be any frantic of taking his clothes and
just dumping them in, you know. It was all ready
there. And the thing was just we were just waiting
for them, you know, when are they going to take him
away. And the last time they came, they took him
away. And... That was when, on that same day, they
wanted all of the people that were involved in the
Army to meet at an elementary school so that they
could, you know, they say that they could have a
meeting and all that, but actually it wasn't a
meeting. It was for them to be taken away to a
concentration camp. So your father was taken away
to this concentration camp? Mm-hmm. Where was it?
Nobody knew. All the other families have their
husband or brothers or son taken away, but they
didn't know where. They were gone because when
they started to loading people up, they told them
not to follow. They told them that just say goodbye
and go home and don't follow us. you know when when
they get situated you know they'll they'll get
some information about it but they were just
saying that but a lot of people they didn't know it
so they believed it so a lot of people were real
happy about it and they just went home and didn't
follow but you know my mom she knew that that it was
going to be a long time before she would get the
first letter from my dad. And so they took him away,
and for I think around half a year or something like
that, There was just no news. I mean, just no news.
My mom would not know where my dad was or where he's
at or how he's doing because they would not tell you
anything. And a lot of wives were starting to get
panic. They were starting to panic. They said,
They kept on going to the personnel office. It's
kind of like a headquarter for a particular
region. And they would come in, they would
complain, they would say, how come you said that
you would give us some news and now you're not going
to and all that. And they would make up some excuse
that there's some trouble or... or they or they
might have gotten lost or something like that and
they would make up like they would be on the same
boat as we are they don't know uh what where they are
or you know where they're at or you know or those
things you know so those wives they were getting
pretty restless and all that So they thought, you
know, a lot of people said, oh, no, my husband's
probably dead or something, because you don't
know if he might have died on the way there or he
might die from them being killed. And a lot of
people thought that those the communists would
take them on the bus so that they would take them out
in the countryside and would execute them all.
That's what they thought. There were a lot of, you
know, a lot of. rumors of what was gonna happen to
those men that were taken away. And so everybody
was just really crazy, going crazy. And finally, A
couple weeks later, finally, they would get their
husband's letter and all that. My dad sent one to
us, and he wrote it to us, and he told us that he
doesn't know where he's at. He said that it is
somewhere out in the country. with farming and all
that. And he said that they're living in a shed
that's made out of trees, made out of leaves and all
that. And he said that he had no idea where it is. And
he said that on the trip, it took very long. And they
did not drop all of the people that were taken in the
same place. dropped one truck to this place and the
other truck to the other place. In other words,
they spread them all out in the countryside. And he
said that he doesn't know where he's at. And he just
told us that he's all right and all that. And
basically what he did was he wrote the letters and
he would tell them our address and they would mail
it to him so in other words if after he writes it they
would check it they would read it and check if he
would you know tell them tell tell my mom anything
any clue or anything but and so if whenever if my dad
would say something wrong what they would do is
they would get some glue and they would remove that
whole sentence out so that my mom would not know,
you know, like that. So after we were real happy to
receive his letter, you know, that's better than
nothing because now we know that, you know, he's
still alive and all that. And he said he was well.
And so we took his word. And then after those
letters, the wives would come back and ask those
guys again, the personnel, that how... how they
supposed to send letters to them if they wanted to
and so what they say is they would tell them to bring
it to them so that they will mail it so in other words
you have to go through them so that they would
proofread it and erase whatever they you write
that is wrong that is unacceptable and then they
mail it to you know to to whoever that you want it to
be mailed so what did your family do plan to do now
that your father was gone? Well, after my dad was
taken, well, before my dad was taken, my... My mom
and the whole family planned what are we going to do
after my dad was going to be gone. And in fact, we had
a lot of discussion about it. And my mom, she was
planning to stay back. And she was planning for us
three, two of my sister and I, and my aunt to escape.
And she would stay back and take care and wait for my
dad. My dad, you know? How long did y'all think he
was going to be held? We thought that he was going to
be held for a real short time. For the soldiers,
they would be held at least one or two years. But for
him, since he is an officer, my mom and everybody
else thought that he would be held around five
years. And so she thought that if she would have
waited, it would still be fine, because five years
is really short. And by that time, when he comes
out, then both of them could escape together. So we
agreed on that. But then my dad wanted my mom to go
with us because he felt that my aunt was not old
enough to take control of us because my aunt at that
time, she was only 13. So she was pretty young also.
So he wanted... a mature adult to be with us so that
we would get through once we escaped. So my dad
convinced my mom to go. So my mom said that, okay,
she'll go. And if she goes, my grandmother stayed
back and helped my dad out. And then when he comes
out, then they both will leave. And so that was the
final decision. So then my mom and us three and my
aunt would leave. And they would say five years
later, my dad and my grandparents would go
together. And so we would leave. And it took us a
year to plan the escape, to buy boats and how many
people are going to go, how much money we're
supposed to pay for the boat and how many days and
all that. So your mother was doing all of this in
secret? Yes. She was doing all this with the other
people that were planning to go with us. And the
other people were basically just real close
relatives. Two of my uncles went with us, and he
was... Two of my uncles, which they are on my dad's
side, went with us and my mom's best friend and her
three kids. Otherwise, we planned an escape that
everybody would know each other. Everybody was
friendly so that there would not be any argument.
And there would not be any argument on what to do and
all that. And so they planned secretly. They would
plan late at night. And my mom, she would go down to
the coast
compromise with the fishermen to sell one of their
boats to us. Because back then, if you were a
fisherman, you basically had around at least
three ships, three boats or even more. to for you to
fish and so they they would sell us one but they
would give us a really high price for it that that
you know that it's just unbelievable but you just
have to try to convince them that you know that
that's all the money you have but basically what
they wanted to do was they wanted you to give them
all the money that you have because They were
thinking that since you're going to be leaving,
you're going to make it so that when you come over
there, you're going to make more money. So why
should you keep the Vietnamese money when you can
give it to them? That's basically why the cost was
so high. So y'all finally did get a boat. We finally
got a boat, and it was a very small boat.
Twenty-four people went. There were four men,
which three of them were my uncles, and one of them
was their best friend.
Two of my uncles, which were on my dad's side, were
in the Navy with their best friend. So they knew how
to operate a boat. They knew how to navigate. They
knew which direction to go and all that. So we
didn't have any trouble in that situation because
we knew that all we had to do was just get a boat,
escape so that nobody knew, and to get out in the
open water and after that we knew that we would we
would make it because uh we had three guys that are
experienced in it and so uh
we we planned and uh one night my mom told us to you
know pack uh pack up and uh Well, the night before,
actually. The night before, she told us that, you
know, go to sleep early because you're going to be
waking up real early in the morning around 4 or 3 or
4, and we're going to go somewhere. So she didn't
actually tell us where we were going. And so we
thought it was real strange that, you know, why
would we need to wake up so early? And so when we woke
up at 3, three of us, my mom and one of my aunts, went
to, take a taxi, kind of like a minibus, and we would
go to the bus station, and the bus station would
take us out in the country where the port was, and at
the port, we would not go 24 people at a time, we
would go like six people per group, so that all the
group would be separately, but then at one certain
time, time at a certain place everybody would meet
and then they would we would all go to a canoe and we
would roll to the main boat that we were gonna
escape and then then we had to stay there a couple
nights because uh in the boat yes in the boat uh
under the fishing compartment because uh for one
thing, the reason why we had to stay down there
because the patrol boat would get suspicious if
they would see so many people on the boat. So in
other words, only the four men stayed up
pretending that they were fishermen. And also,
the reason why we stayed, because the owner that
sold us the boat told us that he was going to help us
get out into the open water because he knows which
route to take so that we would see less of the patrol
headquarters and all that. But bad for us is his
boat caught in a low tide, and... he was caught, you
know, to the bottom. And so his boat couldn't move,
so he had to wait until the tide come back, you know,
the high tide to come back in. And so we had to stay
down there for two whole nights, just staying down
there, staying real quiet. And at that time, it was
the scariest moment for us because we were really
an easy target for them to caught. I mean, if they
catch us, they would see, they would caught us
red-handed. And another thing that was the main
thing was during the year that they were planning,
My mom told us to go swimming in a swimming pool
because in Vietnam we have open door swimming
pool. And the reason why we wanted to do that is
because the people in the country region they were
all dark skinned because they worked out in the
farm and they had really, their skin is really dark
and they have a dark complexion. So that's why my
mom wanted us to go down, to go to swim every day so
that we would soak in the sun so that we would have a
dark complexion so that they would not know that
we, that they would not, the people would not know
that we were from the city and coming down. So they
thought that we would be one of the people that been
here, that been in the country. So we did that. We
all had dark skin, dark complexion. And so we just
went. We waited two nights for them. And then after
that, the next day, they took us out to the open
water and went. Once we got out there, we didn't
have any trouble. We just got out there. There was
no stop, you know, no stop to stop or anything, no
patrol boats or anything. So once we got out there,
they just told us, okay, you're on your own. Good
luck. you know, hope you good luck and all that. And
so they waved us goodbye. Yeah, to the fishermen.
They waved us goodbye and all that. And they went
their own way and we were on our way out to the open
water. Did you have any trouble in the open water?
Any patrol boats? After you get out of the port, it
would be international water. So the patrol, the
communist patrol boat, they don't go out that far.
They would stay around the outer region, and that
would be it. So in other words, we were free. The
only thing that would stop us is weather, and that
was one of the main reasons because during that
year that they were planning, they also had a plan
at what time when what month they would have they
would go because during the July and August season
is where the typhoon season and unlucky for us we
didn't know that so we chose that month to go and so
it took us seven day in the open sea and the four the
first The first day was really calm, but the next
four days was just all thunderstorm, typhoon, and
all that, the four days. And we thought that we
would not make it because the boat was just going,
the wave was just slapping the boat side by side,
side by side, and all that. And in order for us to
keep the boat from going over, from flipping over
was a whole bunch of people had to go down to the
fishing compartment to stay there so that the
balance would be even. And in other words, in the
cabin there would be Only three men and a
couple of kids and my mom would stay in the cabin.
One would navigate, one would steer the boat, and
the other would feed the person that steered. And
the kids that are in the cabin would lay down so that
you want the boat to be evenly weight so that you
would not have one weight on one side so that it
would be so easy to flip over. So y'all were on rough
waters. Rough water, real. Once we got out in the
open water, everybody was down. I mean, we were all
sick already right there because when, you know,
at the part where you go from the port out in the open
water, it's really a lot of waves, and... The boat
was shaking already right there, and so we were not
used to it yet because I, for one, have not even
stepped on a boat before. So we got sick right
there, right away. So actually, only the last two
days were the days that we were really fine.
Otherwise, all the other days, we were gone. Okay,
where did you go from... from there outside of the
port? I went from the port. We went all the way to to
the main Thailand. The main Thailand had little
beachfront that so many refugees had escaped that
they would just, when their boat was in emergency,
like they had a hold, they would just dump their
boat right on the shore. And they would just say,
ha, this is where the place we're going to stay. And
so many people did that, that it became a refugee
camp. And so all along the Thailand coast, shore
this all along the thailand mainland were just
little camps everywhere that were refugees that
were from escape and the majority of them were
vietnamese that escaped because we went a year
late so by the time we got there by the time that we
got to the refuge camp that we stayed it was a really
well established had more more than a hundred
people already there you know waiting for them to
be sponsored and all that so i went straight into
one of these records uh yes we went straight into uh
straight into it yeah and what happened there were
you processed through or well at that time they the
thailand government were really lenient they
knew that a lot of people were going to do this so
they would accept all the refugees to come in and
for them to live in the camp, you know. And then we
would have to give them paper, tell them what
country we prefer to be sponsored to go to and all
that. And then they would give our name to the one of
the ambassadors of that country and he would have a
list and every day, every day around around 10
a.m., there would be guys from other countries,
Canada, France, United States, West Germany, and
all that. They would come, and they would read out
their list, which one was appropriate for them to
go. And so at that time, every day at 10, everybody
would be real crowded in the front gate so that they
would hear their name. And after they hear their
name, they would have to pack and then at the end of
the week there would be a bus to come and pick them
up. And usually it would be every other week there
would be like around 50 people. No, no, it would be
around 25 people would get picked. And they would
go to the bus and they would get transferred into
the capital city of Thailand, which is Bangkok.
And they would stay there for a couple more months
for the process of the actual going to whatever
country you wanted to go. How long were y'all in
there? After we stayed in the refugee camps a
couple days later, my mom was busy writing letters
to my aunt over in Canada. My aunt in Canada, she
lived there for 14 years. She went to school there,
and she got married there, and she decided to stay
there. My mom contacted her for money, and then my
mom also contacted a couple of my dad's real good
friends that he met while he was over in the United
States in 72. And so she would contact them also to
tell them that we are over here already, that we are
waiting, and if there's any way they can help us.
you know, please do, and all that. And so, a couple
days later, my aunt would send us money for food and
all that, and then one of my dad's friends actually
went down to the island, to our place, and he would
talk to my mom, and he would say that, you know,
don't worry, we're going to get you out of here as
soon as possible. And, uh, At the end of the month,
we were gone. We were in the list. You left the
refugee camps. Yes. So actually, we stayed at the
refugee camps only one month. And after that, we
left to Bangkok, and we stayed there. And the
reason why we stayed there three months at the
Bangkok place, the reason why we had to stay so long
The reason why we had to stay so long was because we
had to do some physical examination and see if you
had any disease and a vaccination and all that.
Just take care of yourself and all that. And the
place that we were living in were an abandoned
penitentiary. It was a really big penitentiary.
And when we got there, it was really dirty. And
there were a whole bunch of people that were
already there waiting to be picked up. Everywhere
you go, when you got there, you had to go and find
yourself a place to live. So my mom and I, we would go
down the court, go down the hall, and check out
where we would go. And there would be these cells
that have bar doors. There would be people
actually living in there, and it was really dirty.
They didn't have any bed. They had to sleep down on
the floor. They provided you mattresses, but no
bed frame. So you actually just put the mattresses
on the floor, and you would just sleep there. And so
my mom decided for us not to live in one of those
cells, because there would not be air
circulating, so that it would be real bad for us. So
what we did was we lived under a staircase. so that
there would be air circulating and all that. And so
we stayed there three months, and then we got on the
list. We had all our physical examination was off.
We're all fine. So we were accepted to go. Where
were you going to? We were going to the United
States because my mom did not want to go to Canada
because, for one thing, it was really cold over
there. So she wanted us to go to the United States.
And also, we had a relative that already left in
1970. that she was already there. In fact, she was
my dad's oldest sister, and her family were all
over there. She was established in America. Yeah,
she was already established. So we asked her if she
could sponsor us, and she agreed. you had the main
thing is the two main thing is you had to have a
sponsor and you have your physical examination
have to be good in order for you to be on the list and
we didn't waste any time even though three months
was was very long but we waited and uh we got on the
list a bus came by took us and uh at this time when the
whenever the bus come they would pick up a hundred
people instead of only 25 because That place in
Bangkok was just packed. It was just loaded of
people. There were no places to stay. There were
actually people living out in the hall that you can
barely walk through it. And so they would pick up at
least 100 people every week. And those 100 people
would go to a certain place that they wanted to go.
So it took us a couple hours to go to the airport. We
got on the plane, and we flew to France. And we
stopped there for fuel, refuel, and then we flew
straight to Houston. And my aunt came and picked us
up. Where does your aunt live? Where does she live?
My aunt lives in Houston. So y'all went to live in
Houston? Yes. We went to live with her for a couple
weeks. And then we finally found... Well, she had a
sponsor when she came over. And so what she did was
she asked her sponsor if it was okay if that couple
could be our sponsor. And that couple is a... old
couple, American, an old American couple. They
were really nice and they were really willing and
happy to accept us, you know, as sponsor. And they
took care of us. They brought us clothes, food, and
found us an affordable apartment so that we could
move out because My mom wanted us to start out by
ourselves, so we only stayed with my aunt for two
weeks, and then we were gone. We went to an
apartment that we rented. So you've lived in
Houston ever since? Yes, we live in Houston ever
since. Okay, what is the status with your father?
He didn't get out after those five years? Okay,
when we got out and when we were still over here and
it went past five years and my grandmother quickly
contacted us because she knew that my mom would be
really you know, gone berserk. So she contacted us
and she said that there's something wrong, you
know, that there seems like they're keeping the
officers for a longer time because my uncle, I had
one other uncle that was also went to
concentration camp. And he stayed for only three
years. And he got out. Was he an officer? He was a
sergeant. So you had to be a really high commanding
officer for you to be staying longer than that.
Also, she said that all the other relatives have
sons that were released, but she said that there
were no high commanding officers that were
released yet. My mom had a couple of friends that
decided to stay back. instead because they wanted
to wait for their husband because their husband
because they would said that it would take only
five years so that's not long so i'll stay and so uh
her friends would come to my grandmother and would
cry and would go you know would ask all these
questions you know why why is it taking so long and
all that how long and now they're gonna they
started asking question how long Are they going to
be kept in concentration camp? Is it going to be
forever? Or when are they going to get released and
all that? And my mom wrote back to my grandmother
and said that, OK, we're doing real fine over here.
So just keep going. just keep me updated on what's
going on and all that. So my grandmother would tell
us that everybody is just going berserk.
Everybody's going to their neighbor asking if
their husband or their sons have been released yet
or did they get any letters from them yet. And then
they would go to the headquarters and complain
about it. They would say that, you know, they
wouldn't say that it's five years and how come
they're not out, but they would say, you know, How
long are y'all going to plan to keep them and all
that? And so they say that they don't know and all
that. It's up to the head honcho and all that. Were
you in any contact with your father this time?
During that time, the contact was very little.
During that time, we would receive a letter per two
months, two months or less. So in other words, we
received only six letters a whole year. But
actually, we did not receive my dad's letter. My
dad mailed it to my grandmother, and my
grandmother would go to my aunt, and my aunt would
go down to us, my aunt from Canada, because
somehow, I don't know what it is, but somehow the
mail seems to circulate faster if you go that way.
Because I have no idea why, but that's how we... At
the first time, at the beginning, we did that. But
then later on, we mailed straight from Vietnam all
the way down to Houston, which when we opened the
letter, we would read, you know, It was in June, and
we would receive it all the way until September. So
it would take around three months for the letter to
arrive. Well, anyway, the wives were getting
really crazy. They were getting worried. Now they
were getting worried that if they would ever had a
chance to escape because later on there were less
and less people escaping because there were
bandits. out in the open sea. They knew that there
were refugees going to escape. So they knew that.
So they were waiting out there so that if they see
any boat, they would come and they would take the
valuables, rape the women, and take all the food
and all that. So if you waited around for your
husband to be released, you didn't have much money
to leave after that. Actually, those wives that
had their husbands that were still in the past five
years, they they just forget about the escape
because they knew that there was just no way
because it was just way too late now for them to
escape.